Areej Alsheikh-Hussain
----------------------

I am a UQI scholarship recepient PhD candidate at the Beatson group working on Microbial Genomics and Reverse Vaccinology. I worked at Masdar Institute, Abu Dhabi (UAE), on mangroves soil microbial ecology from Sep 2012 to Jan 2014. On a full scholarship, I obtained my Master's degree from King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia in Marine Science. In collaboration with Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), USA, I have conducted my thesis work on coral associated bacterium from June to Nov 2011. As for my undergrad, I completed a computer science Bachelor's degree with Academic Excellence. It's evident that I have done a major shift in my studies and career path, but this has only positioned me precisely where I want to be having both science flavours, a bioinformatician.

I am interested in understanding the microbial world from a genomic perspective. The amount of information we can extract from merely a sugar and phosphate groups bonded with thousand others astonishes me! I have worked on the 16 ribosomal RNA of environmental microbes from an ecological perspective, but as my knowledge of this field grew bigger, my vision of what truly interest me got clearer. I am passionate about studying the microbes from a clinical perspective in a way that could ultimately aid in the medical and/or veterinary sectors. Therefore, studying pathogenic bacteria and investigating their functional genomes towards directly or indirectly benefiting other living organisms (e.g. humans) is my main research career insterest.

As for my personal interests, I am a person who wants to do everything and go everywhere! I am generally into all sports and outdoor activities, but mostly love basketball, which I have played for 10 years. I also love traveling and I speak English, Arabic and Spanish.  
