:Title: Research
:URL:
:save_as: index.html

.. image:: ../static/images/bl_logo.png
    :alt: Beatson Lab Group logo

The Beatson group aims to better understand the molecular mechanisms of
infectious disease and identify potential therapeutic and diagnostic targets by
exploiting “Next-gen” genomic data. A major focus of the group is the
comparative analysis of genomes obtained from local clinical isolates of
important human pathogens such as *Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Staphylococci, Streptococci, Legionella pneumophila* and *Acinetobacter
baumannii*. In particular, the group is interested in the evolution and
mobility of genes encoding virulence factors that are widely conserved amongst
bacterial pathogens (e.g. fimbriae, pili and type III and type IV secretion
systems and secreted effectors). World-wide there are thousands of bacterial
genome and meta-genome projects in progress, but the bottle-neck remains data
analysis. A major priority in the group is the development of bioinformatics
software to effectively utilize Next-gen sequence data.

Current projects range from researching fundamental questions such as “how has
*Escherichia coli* pathogenesis evolved?” and "how are genes transferred 
between bacteria?" to the identification of potential diagnostic and vaccine 
targets and the development of software tools to enable integrated analysis of 
100’s or 1000’s of bacterial genomes. 

The Beatson group work closely with other local and international molecular 
microbiologists and clinicians particularly Prof Mark Schembri (UQ), 
Prof Mark Walker (UQ), Prof Elizabeth Hartland (UMel), Dr Mat Upton 
(Manchester), Prof Ian Henderson (Birmingham) and Prof David Gally (Edinburgh).

**Read more about our research in our** blog_.

**Have a look at some** photos_ **of recent activities**.

.. _blog: http://beatsonlab-microbialgenomics.github.io/archives
.. _photos: http://beatsonlab-microbialgenomics.github.io/photos.html

Available projects
------------------

Potential projects include:
    * Developing software for Next-Gen bacterial genome and meta-genome 
      assembly, annotation and analysis
    * Investigating the role of positive selection in the evolution of 
      bacterial pathogenesis
    * Genomic epidemiology: investigating outbreaks using genome sequencing
    * Reverse vaccinology: identifying candidate bacterial vaccine candidates
    * Investigating the role of bacteriophage in mobilizing virulence genes

